Now coming back here,
most of the time what
we want is to work with the page, okay?
We need to work with the patient and
actually,
because this is going to be executed
after the parsing has finished.
I could directly do things
like getElementByID, or
getElementsByName or query selector.
So I could do this in a defer script,
okay?
So I can go and grab my nav, okay?
Some things like that, I can do that.
However, it's not a good practice, why?
Because some browsers, I mean,
it's not really happening in
the real world, but in theory,
it might happen that some browsers are
still working in the creation of the DOM.
So the parsing has finished, but for
some reason that DOM structure
in memory is not finished yet.
So that's why the window
object has an event that
we can listen to that specifies
that the DOM is ready for
manipulation, and
that happens always after defer,
after my code is executed.
So the event is known as
DOM content loaded.
And here we are going to
see that they were not,
I mean the W3C spec is not
completely following the same
naming guideline as for
the rest of the events.
This is kind of an exception I will
get into that later but anyway.
So actually I'm going to execute
something there, for example that code.
And for now,
let's say console.log, my nav.
So, meaning that to work with the DOM,
it's better, To wait for the event.
Before that event, the DOM objects that
you wanna manipulate might not be ready,
might not be in memory, and
they may be in like weird state.
So that's why most of the time,
we're going to use DOMContentLoaded.
If you have ever played with
JavaScript like 10 years ago,
15 years ago, you probably have
heard about the load event.
That was the common scenario,
like in the IE era, Netscape and
IE era, the load event is still there.
Does anyone know the difference between
the load event and the DOMContentLoaded?
I know the difference,
so I will explain that.
[LAUGH] The load waits for
everything in the page to be loaded.
That means style sheets are loaded and
parsed, images are loaded,
web fonts are loaded, videos
are loaded when everything is ready.
If you wait for that, you're missing the
opportunity to manipulate the DOM earlier.
And maybe the user is I mean,
if you have a video for example,
maybe the video is still loading But
the user is trying to use the app, and
it's not working because you
didn't execute the JavaScript yet.
You didn't initialize the app because
you're waiting for the video to finish,
which doesn't make any sense.
So that's why we typically initialize
our app in DOM content loaded,
that means as soon as possible.
If the browser, after executing my code,
is still downloading videos,
fonts, images, it's fine.
In fact, that doesn't mean that
when DOM content loaded is fired,
that doesn't mean that the user
has actually seen the page.
In fact,
I'm pretty sure it's not seen the page.
This event happens before rendering, but
it means that the DOM in memory
is ready for us to manipulation.
Manipulation means add some things, add
event handlers, understanding
what's going on,
adding a button hooking
an event to the button, so
when it appears on the screen and the user
clicks on the button, it will work, okay?
Makes sense?
So everything that you do for
initialization, you do that in
DOM content loaded as an event.
It's like what we typically use as
our initializer for the whole app.
And by the way,
there are more events, I mean,
in the life cycle of the page load, there
are more events that you can hook into,
but they are not part of the DOM API.
They're part of a performance navigation
API that is used for performance.
So we are not going to cover that today,
but
there are a lot of events
in terms of the timeline.
When we are working with performance, you
can know when the rendering appear, for
example, for when the user is
seeing a pixel on the screen.
When the user is seeing
that's called first paint.
You can know when the user has it's
actually seen the most important
part of the page that can be an image or
a title,
its first contentful paint,
the largest contentful paint.
So there are a lot of events that
are not part of the DOM API.
They're part of other APIs that
browsers might implement or not.
Like typically Chrome implements all of
them, Firefox, and Safari, it depends.
So, here, we are covering the DOM API,
that is an API that works everywhere,
even in an old BlackBerry,
things like that, okay?
So far nothing is on the screen yet,
but actually,
I could take my nav for example,
and I can change its inner HTML.
This is just for playing a little
bit I'm not going to use this.
So I'm going to write a back tick here,
and I'm going to show
you that I can write my own HTML,
like hello DOM like that, and
you can see that on the screen I can
write HTML within a JavaScript string.
You can see it's a string.
When I'm saving this.
This web server has live reload,
so every time I save.
It works here.
I mean,
you if I let's let's try
to analyze the DOM now.
Anyway, this is not the code
that I want for my app.
But now if I inspect my code,
my nav originally have links and
a span, okay?
Can you see that in my original HTML,
but they're not here anymore?
My nav only has an H2 and
a paragraph, why?
Because I changed the DOM
dynamically with JavaScript.
When the DOM was ready, the original DOM
was ready, I replaced it completely, and
now I have an H2 and a paragraph, and
that's because I'm using this code here.
Okay, makes sense?
By the way,
I'm using the backtick just for
making a template string that can be multi
line, so it's easier to write HTML, okay?
But it can be just a normal HTML as well.